---
layout: post
title: What is a Data Scientist?
---

In 2012, an article in the Harvard Business Review called a data scientist “the sexiest job of the 21st Century” for good reasons.  Individuals and enterprises are bombarded with overwhelming amounts of data every day. They need a superhero who can rescue them from drowning in terabytes of meaningless ones and zeros.  A data scientist can gleam insights from the depths of data, coaxing it to tell a powerful story so that stakeholders can make smart, data-driven decisions.

Data scientists blend statistics with software engineering and a dash of art.  They must be highly skilled in the methods of statistical analysis—it’s what makes data science a scientific discipline.  They must also have knowledge of data analysis tools such as Python, SAS, and R; have experience in SQL database coding; and possess an understanding of machine learning.  Data scientists ingest mountains of data, transform it into something tidy, explore it using statistical methods, select a prediction model, evaluate that model, and finally tell a story to a broader audience.  It’s in this last step in the data science process, data visualization and storytelling, that artistic data scientists can shine.   For to be impactful, they must be able to communicate their discoveries efficiently and effectively to those who will ultimately act.  

Since data science is built upon statistics, are data scientists synonymous with statisticians?  Not quite.  Data scientists deal with massive raw data sets; statisticians work with traditional, small-scale data collections commonly sourced from designed experiments or observational surveys.  Data scientists create models that focus on making accurate predictions for their stakeholders; statisticians build models that address theoretical assumptions to achieve the best fit.  Both careers overlap but there is one key difference:  data scientists seek automation through new technologies.  For example, they use machine learning to improve their model over time as new data becomes available.

But is the sexiness in a data science career because of high pay, high demand, and high security?  No, those are great perks, but the real beauty is the data scientist’s journey.  No two days are the same and each is filled with discovery, insights, and innovation.   Data science is ubiquitous, spanning across business, economics, medicine, and every flavor of science.  Thus, data scientists can be agile, moving from problem to problem, making them invaluable to individuals and enterprises that wish to learn from the past to improve the future.
